# Distaff VM
Distaff VM is a simple [stack machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stack_machine). This means all values live on the stack and all operations work with values near the top of the stack. 

### The stack
Currently, Distaff VM stack can be up to 32 items deep (this will be increased in the future). However, the more stack space a program uses, the longer it will take to execute, and the larger the execution proof will be. So, it pays to use stack space judiciously.

Values on the stack are elements of a [prime field](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite_field) with modulus `340282366920938463463374557953744961537` (which can also be written as 2<sup>128</sup> - 45 * 2<sup>40</sup> + 1). This means that all valid values are in the range between `0` and `340282366920938463463374557953744961536` - this covers almost all 128-bit integers.   

All arithmetic operations (addition, multiplication) also happen in the same prime field. This means that overflow happens after a value reaches field modulus. So, for example: `340282366920938463463374557953744961536 + 1 = 0`.

Besides being field elements, values in Distaff VM are untyped. However, some operations expect binary values and will fail if you attempt to execute them using non-binary values. Binary values are values which are either `0` or `1`.

### Programs
Programs in Distaff VM are structures as an [execution graph](../core/doc/programs.md) of program blocks each consisting of a sequence of VM [instructions](../core/docs/isa.md). You can construct this graph manually, but it is much easier to construct it by compiling [Distaff assembly](../assembly) source code.

In fact, Distaff assembly is the preferred way of writing programs for Distaff VM, and all references and examples in these docs use assembly syntax.

### Inputs / outputs
Currently, there are 3 ways to get values onto the stack:

1. You can use `push` operations to push values onto the stack. These values become a part of the program itself, and, therefore, cannot be changed between program executions. You can think of them as constants.
2. You can initialize the stack with a set of public inputs as described [here](#program-inputs). Because these inputs are public, they must be shared with a verifier for them to verify program execution.
3. You can provide unlimited number of secret inputs via input tapes `A` and `B`. Similar to public inputs, these tapes are defined as a part of [program inputs](#program-inputs). To move secret inputs onto the stack, you'll need to use `read` operations.

Values remaining on the stack after a program is executed can be returned as program outputs. You can specify exactly how many values (from the top of the stack) should be returned. Currently, the number of outputs is limited to 8. A way to return a large number of values (hundreds or thousands) is not yet available, but will be provided in the future.

### Memory
Currently, Distaff VM has no random access memory - all values live on the stack. However, a memory module will be added in the future to enable saving values to and reading values from RAM.

### Program hash
All Distaff programs can be reduced to a single 32-byte value, called program hash. Once a `Program` object is constructed (e.g. by compiling assembly code), you can access this hash via `Program.hash()` method. This hash value is used by a verifier when they verify program execution. This ensure that the verifier verifies execution of a specific program (e.g. a program which the prover had committed to previously). The methodology for computing program hash is described [here](../core/docs/programs.md#Program-hash).

## Usage
Distaff crate exposes `execute()` and `verify()` functions which can be used to execute programs and verify their execution. Both are explained below, but you can also take a look at several working examples [here](../examples).

### Executing a program 
To execute a program on Distaff VM, you can use `execute()` function. The function takes the following parameters:

* `program: &Program` - the program to be executed. A program can be constructed manually by building a program execution graph, or compiled from Distaff assembly (see [here](#Writing-programs)).
* `inputs: &ProgramInputs` - inputs for the program. These include public inputs used to initialize the stack, as well as secret inputs consumed during program execution (see [here](#Program-inputs)).
* `num_outputs: usize` - number of items on the stack to be returned as program output. Currently, at most 8 outputs can be returned.
* `options: &ProofOptions` - config parameters for proof generation. The default options target 96-bit security level.

If the program is executed successfully, the function returns a `Result` with a tuple with 2 elements:

* `outputs: Vec<u128>` - the outputs generated by the program. The number of elements in the vector will be equal to the `num_outputs` parameter.
* `proof: StarkProof` - proof of program execution. `StarkProof` can be easily serialized and deserialized using `to_bytes()` and `from_bytes()` functions respectively.

#### Program inputs
To provide inputs for a program, you must create a `ProgramInputs`` object which can contain the following:

* A list of public inputs which will be used to initialize the stack. Currently, at most 8 public inputs can be provided.
* Two lists of secret inputs. These lists can be thought of as tapes `A` and `B`. You can use `read` operations to read values from these tapes and push them onto the stack.

Besides the `ProgramInputs::new()` function, you can also use `ProgramInputs::from_public()` and `ProgramInputs:none()` convenience functions to construct the inputs object.

#### Writing programs
To execute a program, Distaff VM consumes a [Program](https://github.com/GuildOfWeavers/distaff/blob/master/src/programs/mod.rs) object. This object contains an execution graph for the program, as well as other info needed to execute the program. There are two way of constructing a `Program` object:

1. You can construct a `Program` object by manually building program execution graph from raw Distaff VM [instructions](docs/isa.md).
2. You can compile [Distaff assembly](docs/assembly.md) source code into a `Program` object.

The latter approach is strongly encouraged because building programs from raw Distaff VM instructions is tedious, error-prone, and requires an in-depth understanding of VM internals. All examples throughout these docs use assembly syntax.

A general description of Distaff VM is also provided 👉 [here](docs) 👈. If you are trying to learn how to write programs for Distaff VM, this would be a good place to start.

#### Program execution example
Here is a simple example of executing a program which pushes two numbers onto the stack and computes their sum:
```Rust
use distaff::{assembly, ProgramInputs, ProofOptions};

// this is our program, we compile it from assembly code
let program = assembly::compile("begin push.3 push.5 add end").unwrap();

// let's execute it
let (outputs, proof) = distaff::execute(
        &program,
        &ProgramInputs::none(),     // we won't provide any inputs
        1,                          // we'll return one item from the stack
        &ProofOptions::default()    // we'll be using default options
    ).unwrap();

// the output should be 8
assert_eq!(vec![8], outputs);
```

### Verifying program execution
To verify program execution, you can use `verify()` function. The function takes the following parameters:

* `program_hash: &[u8; 32]` - an array of 32 bytes representing a hash of the program to be verified.
* `public_inputs: &[u128]` - a list of public inputs against which the program was executed.
* `outputs: &[u128]` - a list of outputs generated by the program.
* `proof: &StarkProof` - the proof generated during program execution.

The function returns `Result<bool, String>` which will be `Ok<true>` if verification passes, or `Err<message>` if verification fails, with `message` describing the reason for the failure.

Verifying execution proof of a program basically means the following:

> If a program with the provided hash is executed against some secret inputs and the provided public inputs, it will produce the provided outputs.

Notice how the verifier needs to know only the hash of the program - not what the actual program was.

#### Verifying execution example
Here is a simple example of verifying execution of the program from the previous example:
```Rust
use distaff;

let program =   /* value from previous example */;
let proof =     /* value from previous example */;

// let's verify program execution
match distaff::verify(program.hash(), &[], &[8], &proof) {
    Ok(_) => println!("Execution verified!"),
    Err(msg) => println!("Execution verification failed: {}", msg)
}
```

## Fibonacci calculator
Let's write a simple program for Distaff VM (using [Distaff assembly](../assembly). Our program will compute the 5-th [Fibonacci number](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fibonacci_number):

```
push.0      // stack state: 0
push.1      // stack state: 1 0
swap        // stack state: 0 1
dup.2       // stack state: 0 1 0 1
drop        // stack state: 1 0 1
add         // stack state: 1 1
swap        // stack state: 1 1
dup.2       // stack state: 1 1 1 1
drop        // stack state: 1 1 1
add         // stack state: 2 1
swap        // stack state: 1 2
dup.2       // stack state: 1 2 1 2
drop        // stack state: 2 1 2
add         // stack state: 3 2
```
Notice that except for the first 2 operations which initialize the stack, the sequence of `swap dup.2 drop add` operations repeats over and over. In fact, we can repeat these operations an arbitrary number of times to compute an arbitrary Fibonacci number. In Rust, it would like like this (this is actually a simplified version of the example in [fibonacci.rs](../examples/src/fibonacci.rs)):
```Rust
use distaff::{ self, ProofOptions, ProgramInputs, assembly };

// use default proof options
let options = ProofOptions::default();

// set the number of terms to compute
let n = 50;

// build the program
let mut source = format!("
    begin 
        repeat.{}
            swap dup.2 drop add
        end
    end", n - 1);
let program = assembly::compile(&source).unwrap();

// initialize the stack with values 0 and 1
let inputs = ProgramInputs::from_public(&[1, 0]);

// execute the program
let (outputs, proof) = distaff::execute(
        &program,
        &inputs,
        1,          // top stack item is the output
        &options);

// the output should be the 50th Fibonacci number
assert_eq!(vec![12586269025], outputs);
```
Above, we used public inputs to initialize the stack rather than using `push` operations. This makes the program a bit simpler, and also allows us to run the program from arbitrary starting points without changing program hash.

This program is rather efficient: the stack never gets more than 4 items deep.

## License
This project is [MIT licensed](../LICENSE).